_episodes/l2-03-collaborating.md, before:

---
title: "Episode 3: Collaborating"
teaching: 20
exercises: 40
questions:
- "How can I make a contribution to other people repositories?"
- "How do I know what changes other people are making in my repo?"
objectives:
- "Explain what forks and pull requests (PR) are."
- "Open a PR to make a contribution to someone else's repository."
- "Review a PR to check what changes have been made."
- "(Bonus) Update your fork to keep it up to date with the original repository."
keypoints:
- "Forks and pull requests are GitHub concepts, not git."
- "Pull request can be opened to branches on your own repository or any other
 fork."
- "Some branches are restricted, meaning that PR cannot be open against them."
- "Merging a PR does not delete the original branch, just modifies the target one."
- "PR are often created to solve specific issues."
---

Now that you have your repositories in GitHub, you will learn how to start
 collaborating with other people, contributing with content to their
  repositories and accepting other's contributions to your own. 

## Forking someone else's repository

- `forking` a repository means creating a copy of it in your own GitHub
 account.
- This copy is fully under your control, and you can create branches, push new
 commits, etc., as you would do with any other of your repos.
- `fork` is a GitHub concept and not Git. 
- `forks` are related to the original repository, and the number of forks a
 given repository has can be seen in the upper right corner of the repo page.
- If you have some changes in your fork that you want to contribute to the
 original repo, you open a `pull request`.
 
The image below shows that this repository has been forked 6 times already. To
 fork it yourself, click on `fork` and choose your personal account.  

![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/fork.png
 "Options in the upper right corner of the repository."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
 
> ## Playing with a fork
> Visit [GITHUB REPOSITORY] and fork it. Explore the options in the repo. What's
> different from a repository you created? And from the original one?
> > ## Solution
> > - The only visual difference with one of your repos is that there is a note
> > just below the name indicating where this repo was forked from. 
> > - You can also open PR (see below) across forks.
> > - In the original repo, you don't have write access, i.e. you cannot
> > modify any file or change any setting.
>{: .solution}
{: .challenge}
 
## Pull requests

- `pull requests` (or PR, for short) are the GitHub method of contributing to
 other's people repositories and keep track of changes made to your own.
- As with `forks`, PRs are a GitHub concept. 
- A `pull request` means: "Hey, I have some changes I would like to contribute
 to your repo. Please, have a look at them and `pull` them into your own."
- You can open a PR from a branch in your repo to another branch in your own
 repo or the original repository it was forked from. 
- Depending on the access settings, some branches might not allow to have PR
 opened against them. These are `protected` branches and are often associated
  to "stable" versions of the software contained in the repo.
- In a repository with several collaborators, opening PR against branches in
 the same repo are the best method of letting them know of the changes you
  are introducing.
- The CONTRIBUTING file of the repository contains details on what
 information should be included in a PR to make it clear and effective.

To open a PR, just click on the corrsponding button next to the branch
 selector, as shown in the next figure. 
 
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/PR_1.png
 "How to open a PR."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
 
In the next screen, you can select the target branch (where things will be
merged, if the PR is accepted) and the branch that you want to merge. You
can open PR involving branches within the same repo or between a repo and
any other fork of it. Once the branches are selected, a comparison between
the files that are different will appear below. 
 
 ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/PR_2.png
 "Choosing original and target branches."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
  
### Requesting reviewers

- When opening a PR, you can request it to be reviewed by someone else, so
 there is another pair of eyes making sure that your contribution is correct
  and does not introduce any bugs.
- Reviewers can just **comment** on the PR, **approve** it, or
 **request changes** before it can be approved. 
- Some repositories might require the approval of one or more reviewers
 before the changes can be merged into the target branch.
- Only administrators of the target repository can merge PR.

### Reviewing PR

- When reviewing a PR, you will be shown, for each file changed, a comparison
 between the old and the new  version, much like `git diff` (indeed, it is
  `git diff` between the original and target branches, just nicely formatted).
- You can add comments and suggest changes to specific lines in the code. 
- Comments and suggestions must be constructive and help the code to become
 better. Comments of the type "this can be done better" are discouraged. The
  CONTRIBUTING or the CODE_OF_CONDUCT files often contain information on how
   to make a good review.
   
## Issues

- Issues are another feature of GitHub, used to report bugs, request
 features or enhancements, or to discuss implementation details of some parts
  of the code. 
- Issues are a kind of TODO list, with pending and completed tasks as well as
 serving to prioritise the development activity. 
- Labels can be added to the issues by the repository administrator to inform
 at a first glance what the issue is about. Typical labels are "bug",
  "enhancement", "low priority" or "good first issue", for example.
- Issues also can have one or more people assigned to them who will take care
 of sorting them out and closing them when done or if no longer relevant.
 - By default any GitHub user can create an issue in a public repository
> ## Mentioning other issues and PR
>
> All issues and PR receive a tag number starting at 1 and preceded by #, 
> like #40 or #110. If you want to refer to an issue or PR in any comment
> anywhere in GitHub, just use its tag number and these will be automatically
> linked from the comment. 
 {: .callout}

> ## Closing issues
>
> If a PR tackles a particular issue, you can automatically close that issue
> when the PR is merged by indicating `Close #ISSUE_NUMBER` in any commit
> message of the PR or in a comment within the PR. 
 {: .callout}

The following figure shows some of the issues open in a certain repository. The
labels tell us there are a couple of bug reports, a couple of issues related
to the performance of the software and several ones that are simple enough
to be tackled by novice people. Most of them have some discussion going on. 

To open a new issue, simply click on the `New Issue` green button on the right. 

 ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/issues.png
 "Example of issues."){:class="img
 -responsive"}

> ## Making a book of recipes
> Together with some colleagues, you are writing a book of recipes for sauces
> and you are using git for version control and GitHub to collaborate in the
> writing of the book. 
> 
> Form groups of 3-4 people and choose one to act as administrator. This
> person should:
>- Fork [THIS REPOSITORY] with the skeleton of the book.
>- Pass the link to the repo to your colleagues. 
>
> Now, start collaborating!
>- All, including the administrator, open new issues with recipes for sauces you
> will like to have in the book.
>- Administrator, add some tags, prioritising some of the recipes, and assign
> yourself or one of your colleagues as responsible for each of them.
>- Fork the administrator's repository. Administrator, did you notice how the
> number of forks increases? Which GitHub users forked it from you? And from
> the original repo?
>- Work on the recipes you have been assigned (you can work directly in
> GitHub, there is no need to create a local repository). 
>- When ready, open a PR to the administrator's repo and request his/her review.
>- Administrator, review the PR, request some changes and accept others. When
> ready, merge the PR.
> 
> These exercises can be repeated with the other members of the group acting
> now as administrators and choosing a different topic for the recipes (eg
>. pasta, roasts, cocktails, etc.).
{: .challenge}

## Bonus: Keeping your fork sync with the original repo

In the previous exercise, the individual forks will be outdated as you
 contribute with content to the administrator's repo. Follow these
  instructions to make sure that your own forks are kept up to date. 
  
- [Configuring a remote for a fork](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-a-remote-for-a-fork)
- [Syncing a fork](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/syncing-a-fork)


{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

Updates examples about making a book of recipies.

_episodes/l2-03-collaborating.md, after:

---
title: "Episode 3: Collaborating"
teaching: 20
exercises: 40
questions:
- "How can I make a contribution to other people repositories?"
- "How do I know what changes other people are making in my repo?"
objectives:
- "Explain what forks and pull requests (PR) are."
- "Open a PR to make a contribution to someone else's repository."
- "Review a PR to check what changes have been made."
- "(Bonus) Update your fork to keep it up to date with the original repository."
keypoints:
- "Forks and pull requests are GitHub concepts, not git."
- "Pull request can be opened to branches on your own repository or any other
 fork."
- "Some branches are restricted, meaning that PR cannot be open against them."
- "Merging a PR does not delete the original branch, just modifies the target one."
- "PR are often created to solve specific issues."
---

Now that you have your repositories in GitHub, you will learn how to start
 collaborating with other people, contributing with content to their
  repositories and accepting other's contributions to your own. 

## Forking someone else's repository

- By default, a public repository can be seen by anyone but only the owner can 
 make changes e.g. create new commits or branches.
- `forking` a repository means creating a copy of it in your own GitHub
 account.
- This copy is fully under your control, and you can create branches, push new
 commits, etc., as you would do with any other of your repos.
- `fork` is a GitHub concept and not Git. 
- `forks` are related to the original repository, and the number of forks a
 given repository has can be seen in the upper right corner of the repo page.
- If you have some changes in your fork that you want to contribute to the
 original repo, you open a `pull request`.
 
The image below shows that this repository has been forked 6 times already. To
 fork it yourself, click on `fork` and choose your personal account.  

![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/fork.png
 "Options in the upper right corner of the repository."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
 
> ## Playing with a fork
> Visit [GITHUB REPOSITORY] and fork it. Explore the options in the repo. What's
> different from a repository you created? And from the original one?
> > ## Solution
> > - The only visual difference with one of your repos is that there is a note
> > just below the name indicating where this repo was forked from. 
> > - You can also open PR (see below) across forks.
> > - In the original repo, you don't have write access, i.e. you cannot
> > modify any file or change any setting.
>{: .solution}
{: .challenge}
 
## Pull requests

- `pull requests` (or PR, for short) are the GitHub method of contributing to
 other's people repositories and keep track of changes made to your own.
- As with `forks`, PRs are a GitHub concept. 
- A `pull request` means: "Hey, I have some changes I would like to contribute
 to your repo. Please, have a look at them and `pull` them into your own."
- You can open a PR from a branch in your repo to another branch in your own
 repo or the original repository it was forked from. 
- Depending on the access settings, some branches might not allow to have PR
 opened against them. These are `protected` branches and are often associated
  to "stable" versions of the software contained in the repo.
- In a repository with several collaborators, opening PR against branches in
 the same repo are the best method of letting them know of the changes you
  are introducing.
- The CONTRIBUTING file of the repository contains details on what
 information should be included in a PR to make it clear and effective.

To open a PR, just click on the corrsponding button next to the branch
 selector, as shown in the next figure. 
 
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/PR_1.png
 "How to open a PR."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
 
In the next screen, you can select the target branch (where things will be
merged, if the PR is accepted) and the branch that you want to merge. You
can open PR involving branches within the same repo or between a repo and
any other fork of it. Once the branches are selected, a comparison between
the files that are different will appear below. 
 
 ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/PR_2.png
 "Choosing original and target branches."){:class="img
 -responsive"}
  
### Requesting reviewers

- When opening a PR, you can request it to be reviewed by someone else, so
 there is another pair of eyes making sure that your contribution is correct
  and does not introduce any bugs.
- Reviewers can just **comment** on the PR, **approve** it, or
 **request changes** before it can be approved. 
- Some repositories might require the approval of one or more reviewers
 before the changes can be merged into the target branch.
- Only administrators of the target repository can merge PR.

### Reviewing PR

- When reviewing a PR, you will be shown, for each file changed, a comparison
 between the old and the new  version, much like `git diff` (indeed, it is
  `git diff` between the original and target branches, just nicely formatted).
- You can add comments and suggest changes to specific lines in the code. 
- Comments and suggestions must be constructive and help the code to become
 better. Comments of the type "this can be done better" are discouraged. The
  CONTRIBUTING or the CODE_OF_CONDUCT files often contain information on how
   to make a good review.
   
## Issues

- Issues are another feature of GitHub, used to report bugs, request
 features or enhancements, or to discuss implementation details of some parts
  of the code. 
- Issues are a kind of TODO list, with pending and completed tasks as well as
 serving to prioritise the development activity. 
- Labels can be added to the issues by the repository administrator to inform
 at a first glance what the issue is about. Typical labels are "bug",
  "enhancement", "low priority" or "good first issue", for example.
- Issues also can have one or more people assigned to them who will take care
 of sorting them out and closing them when done or if no longer relevant.
 - By default any GitHub user can create an issue in a public repository
> ## Mentioning other issues and PR
>
> All issues and PR receive a tag number starting at 1 and preceded by #, 
> like #40 or #110. If you want to refer to an issue or PR in any comment
> anywhere in GitHub, just use its tag number and these will be automatically
> linked from the comment. 
 {: .callout}

> ## Closing issues
>
> If a PR tackles a particular issue, you can automatically close that issue
> when the PR is merged by indicating `Close #ISSUE_NUMBER` in any commit
> message of the PR or in a comment within the PR. 
 {: .callout}

The following figure shows some of the issues open in a certain repository. The
labels tell us there are a couple of bug reports, a couple of issues related
to the performance of the software and several ones that are simple enough
to be tackled by novice people. Most of them have some discussion going on. 

To open a new issue, simply click on the `New Issue` green button on the right. 

 ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/issues.png
 "Example of issues."){:class="img
 -responsive"}

> ## Making a book of recipes
> Together with some colleagues, you are writing a book of recipes for sauces
> and you are using git for version control and GitHub to collaborate in the
> writing of the book. 
> 
> Form groups of 3-4 people and choose one to act as administrator. This
> person should:
>- Fork [THIS REPOSITORY] with the skeleton of the book.
>- Pass the link to the repo to your colleagues. 
>
> Now, start collaborating!
>- All, including the administrator, open new issues with recipes for sauces you
> will like to have in the book.
>- Administrator, add some tags, prioritising some of the recipes, and assign
> yourself or one of your colleagues as responsible for each of them.
>- Fork the administrator's repository. Administrator, did you notice how the
> number of forks increases? Which GitHub users forked it from you? And from
> the original repo?
>- Work on the recipes you have been assigned. Practice the concepts learnt
> in previous episodes about cloning a repository, making the changes locally
> and pushing those changes back to the remote repository. You can even try a
> [gitflow aproach](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) 
> if you feel ambitious!
>- When ready, open a PR to the administrator's repo and request his/her review.
>- Administrator, review the PR, request some changes and accept others. When
> ready, merge the PR.
> 
> These exercises can be repeated with the other members of the group acting
> now as administrators and choosing a different topic for the recipes (eg
>. pasta, roasts, cocktails, etc.).
{: .challenge}

## Bonus: Keeping your fork sync with the original repo

In the previous exercise, the individual forks will be outdated as you
 contribute with content to the administrator's repo. Follow these
  instructions to make sure that your own forks are kept up to date. 
  
- [Configuring a remote for a fork](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-a-remote-for-a-fork)
- [Syncing a fork](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/syncing-a-fork)


{% include links.md %}
