_episodes/l2-02-remote_repositories.md, before:

---
title: "Remote repositories"
teaching: 20
exercises: 20
questions:
- "Is my local repository the same as the remote one?"
- "How can I send my local changes to the remote one?"
- "How can I get the changes others have made?"
objectives:
- "Explain the differences between a local and a remote repository."
- "Explain what *tracking* and *upstream* mean."
- "Use the push command to send changes on the local branch to the remote one."
- "Use the pull command to update your local branch with the remote one."
- "Find out the available remote branches."
- "Setup a local branch to track a new remote one."
keypoints:
- "origin is typically the name of the remote repository used by git."
- "Local and remote repositories are not identical, in general."
- "Local and remote repositories are not synchronized automatically."
- "push and pull commands only affect the branch currently checked out."
- "Only changes to a branch that are committed are pushed to the remote."
- "Local branches need to be explicitly pushed to a new remote one in order to share them."
---

## Remote and local repositories

- The repository you just created in the previous episode is a **remote
  repository**: it is hosted by a third party hosting system, GitHub in this
  case.
- The repository you used in Lesson 1 was a **local repository**: it was just a
  directory on your hard drive using git for version control.
- Local and remote repositories can be synchronized, so changes are accessible
  by other contributors.
- **This synchronisation is not automatic**: it has to be done explicitly for
  each branch you want to keep up to date (see **pull** and **push** below ).
- The default name for a remote repository synchronised with a local one is
  `origin`.

### Tracking and upstream

- A local branch synchronised with a remote one is said to be **tracking** that
  remote branch.
- The remote branch being tracked is called the **upstream branch**.

## Configuring repositories

Depending on whether you are starting from a remote repository and want to get a
local one out of it or the other way around, the steps are different.

> ## Configuring a remote repository from a local one
>
> In this case, you have a local repository and you want to synchronise it with
> a new, remote one. Let's create a remote for the `recipe` repository you
> worked on in Lesson 1. If you have lost your copy of the `recipe` repository
> you can download a completed copy [here](../code/recipe_complete.zip):
>
> - Create a new repository in GitHub, as in the last episode. Give it a name,
>   description and choose if it should be public or private, but do not add any
>   other file (no README or licence).
> - You will be offered a few options to populate the remote repository. We are
>   interested in the third one.
> - Launch a new command line interface and run `cd recipe` to navigate to the
>   directory where you have your local repository - Then execute:
>
>```bash
>$ git remote add origin [address of your remote repo (should end in .git)]
>$ git push -u origin master
># you will be asked to provide your GitHub username and password
>```
>- The first line will set the GitHub repository as the remote for your
> local one, calling it `origin`.
>- The second line will push your master branch to a remote one called
>  `origin/master`, setting it as its upstream branch.
> - You can check if things went well by going to GitHub: the repository there
>   should contain all the files of your local repository.
{: .challenge}

> ## Configuring a local repository from a remote
> This involves the git command **clone**. Let's create a local copy of the
> `example` repository you created remotely in the last episode.
>
> - On GitHub, the press down arrow in the far top right and choose "Your
>   repositories" from the drop-down menu.
> - Choose the `example` repository from the list.
> - In the main screen of your repository, click on the green button on the
>   right, **Clone or Download**, and copy the address that appears there. 
> - Open a new command line interface and execute the commands:
>
> ```bash
> $ git clone [address of your remote repo]
> $ cd example
> ```
> - This will download the remote repository to a new `example` directory, in
>   full, with all the information on the branches available in `origin` and all
>   the git history.
> - By default, a local `master` branch will be created tracking the
>   `origin/master` branch.
> - You can find some information on the repository using the commands already
>   discussed in Lesson 1, like `git log` or `git branch -vv`, which should show
>   that there is indeed just
>   one branch, `master` tracking `origin/master`)
> ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/clone.png "Effect of cloning a remote repository."){:class="img-responsive"}
{: .challenge}


## Pushing

- Its basic use is to synchronize **any committed changes** in your current
 branch to its upstream branch: `$ git push`.
- Changes in the staging area will not be synchronized.
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/push.png "Push a branch
."){:class="img-responsive"}
- If the current branch has no upstream yet, you can configure one by doing 
`$ git push -u origin [branch_name]`, as done with `master` in the exercise
 above.
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/push_u.png "Push a branch without
 upstream yet."){:class="img-responsive"}
- `push` only operates on your current branch. If you want to push another
 branch, you have to `checkout` that branch first.
- If the upstream branch has changes you do not have in the local branch, the
 command will fail, requesting you to merge those changes first. We will
  discuss this into more detail in the next episode.

> ## Pushing an updated README
> You want to update the README file of the `example` repository with more
> detailed information of what the repository is about and then push
> the changes to the remote.
>
> Modify the README file of your local copy of `example` with your preferred
> editor (any change is good enough, but better if they are useful - or at
> least, funny!) and synchronise the changes with the remote. Check on GitHub
> that you can view the changes you made.
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > $ git add README.md
> > $ git commit -m [Commit message]
> > $ git push
> > ```
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Pulling

- Opposite to `push`, `pull` brings changes in the upstream branch to the local
 branch.
- You can check if there are any changes to synchronize in the upstream
 branch by running `git fetch`, which only checks if there are changes, and then
  `git status` to see how your local and remote branch compare in terms of
   commit history.
- It's best to make sure your repository is in a clean state with no staged or
  unstaged changes.
- If the local and upstream branches have diverged - have different
 commit history - the command will attempt to merge both, dealing with
  conflicts as discussed in Lesson 1.
- You can get a new branch existing only in `origin` directly with `git
 checkout [branch_name]` without the need of creating the branch locally and
  then pulling the remote. 

![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/pull.png "Pull remote changes")
{:class="img-responsive"}

> ## Pulling an updated README
> When reviewing your new README file online, you have discover a typo and
> decided to correct it directly in GitHub. Modify the README file online and
> then synchronise the changes with your local repository (tip: you can edit
> any text file directly in GitHub by clicking in [the little pencil button](https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-files-in-a-repository/editing-files-in-your-repository) 
> in the upper right corner).
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > $ git fetch
> > $ git status
> > ```
> > This will indicate that the remote branch is ahead of your local branch
> by 1 commit. Since there are no diverging commits, it is safe to pull. 
> > ```bash
> > $ git pull
> > ```
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}
  
{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

:memo: Remplaces master by main in the text

_episodes/l2-02-remote_repositories.md, after:

---
title: "Remote repositories"
teaching: 20
exercises: 20
questions:
- "Is my local repository the same as the remote one?"
- "How can I send my local changes to the remote one?"
- "How can I get the changes others have made?"
objectives:
- "Explain the differences between a local and a remote repository."
- "Explain what *tracking* and *upstream* mean."
- "Use the push command to send changes on the local branch to the remote one."
- "Use the pull command to update your local branch with the remote one."
- "Find out the available remote branches."
- "Setup a local branch to track a new remote one."
keypoints:
- "origin is typically the name of the remote repository used by git."
- "Local and remote repositories are not identical, in general."
- "Local and remote repositories are not synchronized automatically."
- "push and pull commands only affect the branch currently checked out."
- "Only changes to a branch that are committed are pushed to the remote."
- "Local branches need to be explicitly pushed to a new remote one in order to share them."
---

## Remote and local repositories

- The repository you just created in the previous episode is a **remote
  repository**: it is hosted by a third party hosting system, GitHub in this
  case.
- The repository you used in Lesson 1 was a **local repository**: it was just a
  directory on your hard drive using git for version control.
- Local and remote repositories can be synchronized, so changes are accessible
  by other contributors.
- **This synchronisation is not automatic**: it has to be done explicitly for
  each branch you want to keep up to date (see **pull** and **push** below ).
- The default name for a remote repository synchronised with a local one is
  `origin`.

### Tracking and upstream

- A local branch synchronised with a remote one is said to be **tracking** that
  remote branch.
- The remote branch being tracked is called the **upstream branch**.

## Configuring repositories

Depending on whether you are starting from a remote repository and want to get a
local one out of it or the other way around, the steps are different.

> ## Configuring a remote repository from a local one
>
> In this case, you have a local repository and you want to synchronise it with
> a new, remote one. Let's create a remote for the `recipe` repository you
> worked on in Lesson 1. If you have lost your copy of the `recipe` repository
> you can download a completed copy [here](../code/recipe_complete.zip):
>
> - Create a new repository in GitHub, as in the last episode. Give it a name,
>   description and choose if it should be public or private, but do not add any
>   other file (no README or licence).
> - You will be offered a few options to populate the remote repository. We are
>   interested in the third one.
> - Launch a new command line interface and run `cd recipe` to navigate to the
>   directory where you have your local repository - Then execute:
>
>```bash
>$ git remote add origin [address of your remote repo (should end in .git)]
>$ git push -u origin main
># you will be asked to provide your GitHub username and password
>```
>- The first line will set the GitHub repository as the remote for your
> local one, calling it `origin`.
>- The second line will push your main branch to a remote one called
>  `origin/main`, setting it as its upstream branch.
> - You can check if things went well by going to GitHub: the repository there
>   should contain all the files of your local repository.
{: .challenge}

> ## Configuring a local repository from a remote
> This involves the git command **clone**. Let's create a local copy of the
> `example` repository you created remotely in the last episode.
>
> - On GitHub, the press down arrow in the far top right and choose "Your
>   repositories" from the drop-down menu.
> - Choose the `example` repository from the list.
> - In the main screen of your repository, click on the green button on the
>   right, **Clone or Download**, and copy the address that appears there. 
> - Open a new command line interface and execute the commands:
>
> ```bash
> $ git clone [address of your remote repo]
> $ cd example
> ```
> - This will download the remote repository to a new `example` directory, in
>   full, with all the information on the branches available in `origin` and all
>   the git history.
> - By default, a local `main` branch will be created tracking the
>   `origin/main` branch.
> - You can find some information on the repository using the commands already
>   discussed in Lesson 1, like `git log` or `git branch -vv`, which should show
>   that there is indeed just
>   one branch, `main` tracking `origin/main`)
> ![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/clone.png "Effect of cloning a remote repository."){:class="img-responsive"}
{: .challenge}


## Pushing

- Its basic use is to synchronize **any committed changes** in your current
 branch to its upstream branch: `$ git push`.
- Changes in the staging area will not be synchronized.
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/push.png "Push a branch
."){:class="img-responsive"}
- If the current branch has no upstream yet, you can configure one by doing 
`$ git push -u origin [branch_name]`, as done with `main` in the exercise
 above.
![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/push_u.png "Push a branch without
 upstream yet."){:class="img-responsive"}
- `push` only operates on your current branch. If you want to push another
 branch, you have to `checkout` that branch first.
- If the upstream branch has changes you do not have in the local branch, the
 command will fail, requesting you to merge those changes first. We will
  discuss this into more detail in the next episode.

> ## Pushing an updated README
> You want to update the README file of the `example` repository with more
> detailed information of what the repository is about and then push
> the changes to the remote.
>
> Modify the README file of your local copy of `example` with your preferred
> editor (any change is good enough, but better if they are useful - or at
> least, funny!) and synchronise the changes with the remote. Check on GitHub
> that you can view the changes you made.
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > $ git add README.md
> > $ git commit -m [Commit message]
> > $ git push
> > ```
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Pulling

- Opposite to `push`, `pull` brings changes in the upstream branch to the local
 branch.
- You can check if there are any changes to synchronize in the upstream
 branch by running `git fetch`, which only checks if there are changes, and then
  `git status` to see how your local and remote branch compare in terms of
   commit history.
- It's best to make sure your repository is in a clean state with no staged or
  unstaged changes.
- If the local and upstream branches have diverged - have different
 commit history - the command will attempt to merge both, dealing with
  conflicts as discussed in Lesson 1.
- You can get a new branch existing only in `origin` directly with `git
 checkout [branch_name]` without the need of creating the branch locally and
  then pulling the remote. 

![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/pull.png "Pull remote changes")
{:class="img-responsive"}

> ## Pulling an updated README
> When reviewing your new README file online, you have discover a typo and
> decided to correct it directly in GitHub. Modify the README file online and
> then synchronise the changes with your local repository (tip: you can edit
> any text file directly in GitHub by clicking in [the little pencil button](https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-files-in-a-repository/editing-files-in-your-repository) 
> in the upper right corner).
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > $ git fetch
> > $ git status
> > ```
> > This will indicate that the remote branch is ahead of your local branch
> by 1 commit. Since there are no diverging commits, it is safe to pull. 
> > ```bash
> > $ git pull
> > ```
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}
  
{% include links.md %}
